This file is part of eRCaGuy_dotfiles: https://github.com/ElectricRCAircraftGuy/eRCaGuy_dotfiles

## Eclipse custom user dictionary 

Eclipse can have a custom user dictionary so that you can left-click on any "misspelled" word and click on `Add 'misspelled_word' to dictionary` in the GUI menu that pops up. It will then add that word to your custom dictionary and mark it as NOT being misspelled anymore.

Add new words to your custom dictionary file--one word per line.

To install the Eclipse custom user dictionary, do one of the following:

### Option 1 (what I like to do):

1. Add a symlink to the dictionary in your home dir. 
    ```bash
    cd path/to/eRCaGuy_dotfiles/home
    ln -si "${PWD}/.eclipse-user-dictionary.txt" ~
    ```
2. In Eclipse, go to **Window** → **Preferences** → **General** → **Editors** → **Text Editors** → **Spelling** and find the "**User defined dictionary**" section. Add the path to the above symlink file you just created (ex: `/home/gabriel/.eclipse-user-dictionary.txt`). 
3. IMPORTANT--DO THIS TOO OR ELSE IT WON'T WORK! Now in the "**Select spelling engine to use**" section in the same window above, change the selection from "**Default spelling engine**" to "**C/C++ spelling engine**" and click "**Apply and Close**".

### Option 2:

- Alternatively, you can just do steps 2 and 3 above and add the path straight to the dictionary file in this repo (cloned on your local hard drive of course).
- OR, you can make your own custom file with any name and in any location on your hard drive you want, and then set the path to it and set the spelling engine according to steps 2 and 3 above. 


## References
1. https://stackoverflow.com/questions/23237111/how-to-create-a-user-dictionary-in-eclipse/28207075#28207075
    1. See also my comments and other comments underneath this answer. 
1. https://syncor.blogspot.com/2011/03/eclipse-adding-user-dictionary-for-cdtc.html
1. https://bugs.eclipse.org/bugs/show_bug.cgi?id=310237
